docs/vault-secrets-operator: encrypted client cache storage (#25475)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/platform/k8s/vso/sources/vault/client-cache.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Enable the encrypted Vault client cache
description: >-
  Learn how to enable the operator's encrypted Vault Client cache for dynamic secrets
---

# Enable the encrypted Vault client cache

> The Vault Secrets Operator supports storing and encrypting its Vault client cache using Vault Server's [transit secrets engine](/vault/docs/secrets/transit). By default client cache storage is not enabled, since it requires extra Vault Server setup, but this guide will walk you through the steps to enable and configure it.

Reviewer: I think the concept of what the client cache is itself probably deserves a bit more introduction:

```suggestion
The Vault Secrets Operator can optionally cache Vault client information such as Vault tokens and leases in Kubernetes Secrets within its own namespace. The client cache enables seamless upgrades because Vault tokens and dynamic secret leases can continue to be tracked and renewed through leadership changes. By default, the client cache is not encrypted because it requires extra configuration and Vault Server setup. But the Vault Secrets Operator supports encrypting the client cache using Vault Server's [transit secrets engine](/vault/docs/secrets/transit). This guide will walk you through the steps to enable and configure client cache encryption.
```

Author: So I tried putting this expanded info on the [main Vault source index page](https://vault-23tw59zt8-hashicorp.vercel.app/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/sources/vault#vault-client-cache). Let me know what y'all think.

<Highlight>

> Enabling encrypted client cache storage is recommended especially when using [VaultDynamicSecrets](/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/api-reference#vaultdynamicsecret).

Author: Sure, I added a little more in 91cc0d9.

</Highlight>

## Step 1: Configure transit

> Use the following commands/terraform to enable the transit secret engine, a key for the client cache, and a policy for the operator to use the key.

Reviewer: nit: Here and elsewhere, should we capitalise Operator to help make clear it's the named product, and not the generic term for a human user? Or alternatively should we establish the VSO initialism at the top and use that everywhere?

```suggestion
Use the following commands/terraform to enable the transit secret engine, a key for the client cache, and a policy for the Operator to use the key.
```

Author: Yeah I added a "(VSO)" near the top, and Sarah's recommendations removed most of the other "operator" references.

<CodeTabs>
<CodeBlockConfig>

```shell-session
export VAULT_NAMESPACE=<VAULT_NAMESPACE>

vault secrets enable transit

vault write -f transit/keys/vso-client-cache

vault policy write operator - <<EOH
path "transit/encrypt/vso-client-cache" {
  capabilities = ["create", "update"]
}
path "transit/decrypt/vso-client-cache" {
  capabilities = ["create", "update"]
}
EOH
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
<CodeBlockConfig>

```hcl
resource "vault_mount" "transit" {
  namespace   = "<VAULT_NAMESPACE>"
  path        = "transit"
  type        = "transit"
  description = "VSO Client Cache"
}

resource "vault_transit_secret_cache_config" "cache" {
  namespace = vault_mount.transit.namespace
  backend   = vault_mount.transit.path
  size      = 500
}

resource "vault_transit_secret_backend_key" "cache" {
  namespace        = vault_mount.transit.namespace
  backend          = vault_mount.transit.path
  name             = "vso-client-cache"
  deletion_allowed = true
}

resource "vault_policy" "operator" {
  namespace = vault_transit_secret_backend_key.cache.namespace
  name      = "operator"

>   policy    = <<EOT

Reviewer: nit: I think this could be refactored slightly cleaner with a [`vault_policy_document`](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/vault/latest/docs/data-sources/policy_document) data source.

Author: Thanks! That is better, done in 1f523bf.

  bound_service_account_names=vault-secrets-operator-controller-manager \
  bound_service_account_namespaces=vault-secrets-operator \
  token_period="24h" \
  token_policies=operator \
  audience="vault"
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
<CodeBlockConfig>

```hcl
 resource "vault_auth_backend" "kubernetes" {
  namespace = "<VAULT_NAMESPACE>"
  path      = "kubernetes"
  type      = "kubernetes"
}

resource "vault_kubernetes_auth_backend_config" "local" {
  namespace       = vault_auth_backend.kubernetes.namespace
  backend         = vault_auth_backend.kubernetes.path
  kubernetes_host = "https://kubernetes.default.svc"
}

resource "vault_kubernetes_auth_backend_role" "operator" {
  namespace                        = vault_auth_backend.kubernetes.namespace
  backend                          = vault_kubernetes_auth_backend_config.local.backend
  role_name                        = "operator"
  bound_service_account_names      = ["vault-secrets-operator-controller-manager"]
  bound_service_account_namespaces = ["vault-secrets-operator"]
  token_period                     = 120
  token_policies = [
    vault_policy.operator.name,
  ]
  audience = "vault"
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
</CodeTabs>

> ## Step 3: (Optional) Add a VaultConnection

Reviewer: I can see what you're getting at with optional, but I think this would be clearer phrased slightly differently:

```suggestion
## Step 3: Configure a VaultConnection
```

Author: Sure, that sounds better

If you have not already added a [VaultConnection](/vault/docs/platform/k8s/vso/api-reference#vaultconnection), add one like the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: secrets.hashicorp.com/v1beta1
kind: VaultConnection
metadata:
  name: local-vault-server
  namespace: vault-secrets-operator
spec:
  address: 'https://vault.vault.svc.cluster.local:8200'
```

> ## Step 4: Enable caching in the operator (Helm)

Reviewer: Are this and the next step mutually exclusive? Maybe mark them as 4.a) and 4.b) or similar to help readers see that without having to read the contents?

Author: I think this has been effectively done with Sarah's `<Tab>` recommendations.

      tokenExpirationSeconds: 600
      audiences: ["vault"]
    method: kubernetes
    mount: kubernetes
    namespace: <VAULT_NAMESPACE>
    storageEncryption:
      keyName: vso-client-cache
      mount: transit
    vaultConnectionRef: local-vault-server
  ```

1. With the operator installed through your cluster's OperatorHub, edit the subscription to set the `VSO_CLIENT_CACHE_PERSISTENCE_MODEL` environment variable in the operator's subscription in the web console or with the OpenShift CLI.

  Using the OpenShift web console:
    - Navigate to Operators -> Installed Operators
    - Select the "Vault Secrets Operator"
    - "Edit Subscription" in the top right action menu

  Using the OpenShift CLI:

    ```shell-session
    oc edit subscription vault-secrets-operator -n vault-secrets-operator
    ```

  Set the following environment variable at `spec.config.env`:

  ```yaml
  spec:
    name: vault-secrets-operator
    channel: stable
    config:
      env:
        - name: VSO_CLIENT_CACHE_PERSISTENCE_MODEL
          value: direct-encrypted
  ```

  The pod in the operator deployment will be restarted once the new environment variable is applied.

> ## Step 6: Verify the client cache storage is enabled

Reviewer: nit: Should we mark this as optional? Not sure.

```suggestion
## Optional: Verify the client cache storage is enabled
```

Author: Sure that makes sense
